the On Point podcast is supported by
prompt make your college application
impossible to ignore with one-on-one
college essay coaching 98 of students
who use prompt get into one of their Top
Choice colleges go to myprompt.com NPR
and get 100 off any package until June
30th
major funding for OnPoint is provided by
Liberty Mutual for all your auto home
life and business insurance needs
Liberty Mutual responsibility what's
your policy
[Music]
from WBUR Boston I'm Tom Ashbrook and
this is on point David Deutsch made his
name in the high science of quantum
Computing theoretical computers so
powerful they could Master the secrets
of the universe and that is the scale he
works on in his new book the beginning
of infinity since the Scientific
Revolution he says human potential has
become just that infinite we are a
player the player in the universe this
hour on point Quantum physicist and
philosopher David Deutsch on humanities
place in the cosmos joining me now from
Oxford England is David Deutsch a fellow
of the Royal Society and professor of
physics at the University of Oxford
where he's a member of their Center for
Quantum compute he's been called the
founding father of quantum Computing for
his groundbreaking work in the field and
is a champion of the theory of parallel
universes the Multiverse he's author of
several hugely bold wide-ranging books
including the fabric of reality and his
latest the beginning of infinity
explanations that transform the world
David Deutsch it is wonderful to have
you with us thank you so much for being
here hi Tom
um thanks for inviting me on the show
you draw an enormous line through human
history at the Enlightenment and
Scientific Revolution
describe the before and after a little
bit for us in Broad Strokes we'll dig in
but stepping back from it what do you
see
um this line is the most important thing
that's ever happened because prior to it
the um the world was static in terms of
ideas
um that is to say things did improve but
from the point of view and sometimes
they improved sometimes they got worse
but always from the point of view of any
individual they would uh the time they
died
the technology the economics the ways of
life that uh everything that they could
notice about the world would not have
changed and it would not have improved
and after the enlightenment it was the
exact opposite we have learned to live
with the fact that everything improves
in every generation and what's more
previous ways of life
become unviable as better ways of life
appear
and this staticity was a I I I call it a
a horrible practical joke played on the
human race by Nature because uh for
hundreds of thousands of years we had
the capacity to improve to reduce human
suffering to increase our knowledge of
the world but almost none of that
happened and then suddenly there was
this explosion where it has happened and
it's not just a matter of us then going
on to develop all kinds of Technology
from microwave ovens to high-speed cars
you name it you say that this change
introduced us or created the beginning
of infinity the title of your book what
do you mean by that uh the the phrase
the beginning of infinity primarily
means the the
Universal Power of explanatory knowledge
but it turned out and I didn't really
plan this when I wrote the book but it
it turned out that in every chapter
there were several different meanings
several different senses in in which
there was a beginning of infinity which
hadn't happened before either a
condition for unlimited progress or a
way or or a beginning of unlimited
progress or the sense in which progress
can be unlimited well and to tie it to
the Scientific Revolution then which you
uh remind us coming in with the
enlightenment how does that produce the
beginning of infinity well it's it's
like this
um science is about finding laws of
nature which are testable regularities
and
um we we discovered this method the
scientific method which I I think is
essentially trying to find good
explanations of what happens rather than
bad explanations that could apply to
absolutely anything
and uh once one uh has this method which
in is the scientific method but it also
ranges more broadly over other fields
like uh philosophy once one has this
method
um the scope of both understanding and
controlling the world has to be
Limitless the reason it has to be
Limitless
is basically everything that isn't
forbidden by laws of physics has to be
possible because this is the simplest
argument in the book if it weren't
possible then that would itself be a
testable regularity in nature for
example we can't travel faster than the
speed of light
that's a limitation on our technology
and it is a law of nature if it were the
case that we could for example never get
off the Earth and never survive on any
other planet that would also be a
testable regularity it would be a law of
nature but there is no such law of
Nature and therefore everything
everything that isn't forbidden by laws
of nature must be possible and that's uh
um a momentous link between
explanatory theoretical knowledge and
technological knowledge the the ability
to control the universe you you are just
thrillingly bold in the way you think
and the way you write there's a lot I
want to dig into here but if you take
just that what you've just shared with
us David Deutsch if that Scientific
Revolution means uh you know with
everything that comes with it a
tradition of criticism willingness to
conjecture and then test discovery of
how to make progress as you describe it
if that means that there is in your
words no limit to understanding and
controlling the world
I'm trying to get my mind around that by
the world you don't just mean this
Earthly Planet you mean the universe
really humans no limit to their
understanding and controlling the
universe that's right on both on the
largest scale and in some ways more
exciting the smallest scale as as
Richard Feynman said there's plenty of
room at the bottom with the
nanotechnology and then space
exploration at the highest scale uh the
thing is there can't be such a limit
because as I just said the any limit
that let's say can find us to the solar
system or even to our galaxy
either would have to be imposed by the
laws of physics or it would have to be
an illusion but what what gives you the
I don't know the nerve the Cohen is to
assert that I mean we you know the
traditional human way of looking at
ourselves is we're so puny we're such a
little speck in the vast Cosmos
yes but you're literally saying we can
without limit understand and control
that Cosmos indeed well the it's it's
ironic that the uh this idea that we're
puny
um and unimportant and the the world
isn't here for our benefit and so on
this idea was at the time when it was
invented about 400 years ago ironically
it was one of the driving forces of the
Scientific Revolution because the
previous World Views had been
anthropocentric the idea was that the
world was built around us it was built
either for our benefit or as a
punishment or for us to obey its moral
laws and so on and uh this was tied in
with traditional authoritarian
um modes of knowledge and the part of
the Enlightenment uh the the early part
of the Enlightenment was a rebellion
against those ideas and we found that
we're not the center of the universe the
the Earth isn't the center of the
universe even and then later we found
even the sun is not and so on but I
think that once we have got over this
early
um anthropocentrism
we find that although humans are not
Central to the universe
explanatory knowledge is and we have a
choice we we don't have to
um uh jump on this bandwagon of uh this
this uh
um built-in potential of the universe if
we don't want to we could destroy
ourselves we could choose not to do it
but uh it because we are capable of
explanatory knowledge we are also
capable of unlimited progress if we so
choose so if we don't turn away from
this path of the Scientific Revolution
laid out and we don't blow ourselves up
we'll talk about both of those but
you're picturing a future with those two
very large IFS in which human beings
what little by little come to get their
hands on the levers of the of the
universe what would that mean certainly
uh I I the thing is
um that the idea that this isn't
possible is essentially a reversion to
uh the archaic
um Supernatural view of the university
the idea there would be that that there
are things that are beyond our
understanding let's accept it for a
moment what would it mean if we do
indeed achieve it we uh well um the
title of the book is the beginning of
infinity and that refers to an
interesting
um property of all kinds of infinity
including this one namely one is never
nearly there one is always just
beginning to scratch the surface of
infinity so once uh there was a time
when the Earth was unimaginably huge
just the surface of the Earth was
unimaginably huge and now we have
learned to regard it as Tiny and
vulnerable
and uh Stephen Hawking has said we and
that we better get off it soon just so
that we hedge our bets
um and there will come a time when there
was there was a time when even the
Northern Hemisphere was unimaginably
hostile territory compared with where we
evolved in the Eastern Africa and so we
have learned not only to conquer the
Northern Hemisphere
um technologically with things like
clothing and fire and so on but having
conquered it once and for all we take
that for granted and we then regard it
as home
[Applause]
[Music]
David Deutsch walks in very high company
both as a scientist as a communicator of
Science and philosophy as well let's
hear from just briefly here David if
you'd be gracious enough from a couple
of others very very briefly here's the
here's the first the late you can hear
this sort of early pre-echo maybe of
David Deutsch's Infinity here the late
astronomer Carl Sagan spoke evocatively
about the wonders of the cosmos here he
is in the cosmo series episode the edge
of forever
every human generation has asked about
the origin and fate of the cosmos
ours is the first generation with a real
chance of finding some of the answers
one way or another
we are poised at the edge of forever
[Music]
ought to put another way maybe at the
beginning of infinity and here's
physicist Stephen Hawking who speaks
through a voice synthesizer warning and
we'll put this to David Deutsch warning
here Stephen Hawking that traits humans
needed for survival may also lead to
their downfall here he speaks at the
online Forum big think if we are the
only intelligent beings in the Galaxy we
should make sure we survive and continue
but we are entering an increasingly
dangerous period of our history
our population and our use of the finite
resources of planet Earth are growing
exponentially along with our technical
ability to change the environment for
good or ill
but our genetic code still carries the
selfish and aggressive instincts that
were of survival advantage in the past
in the past but maybe a danger in the
future David Deutsch our listeners are
paying close attention we have lots of
questions and comments coming to you in
for you already hear from online Lark
writes and let me put this to you
Professor does Professor Deutsch see
mankind has sufficient wisdom and
self-control self-knowledge to make our
potentially infinite influence on the
universe positive rather than
destructive David Deutsch
uh we we have the power to make mistakes
as well as to get things right in fact
um as my old boss John Wheeler used to
say uh in a sense our whole problem is
to make the mistakes as fast as possible
there is no way of doing science
and indeed there is no way of life
altogether that avoids mistakes
that is a recipe to try to do that is a
recipe for disaster because one does not
then build in error correction
mechanisms science is one gigantic error
correction mechanism where we try to
find out all our misconceptions and
we're expecting even our most cherished
beliefs eventually to turn out to be
flawed in some way or another so we have
to be open to that and we have to be
ready
to cope with the Practical consequences
of being wrong but what if the error is
the let's say to Stephen Hawking's fear
the destruction of a planet that we very
much need to live on well um okay I
entirely agree with Stephen Hawking that
we should
um hedge our bets by uh moving away from
the earth and colonizing the solar
system and then the Galaxy and so on uh
I disagree with his reason
um the the this all his list of reasons
I think are all rooted in uh this rather
ancient uh pre-scientific way of looking
at the world which has survived in
certain
um uh prevailing attitudes the idea for
example that we're inherently selfish
and aggressive and so on that is an uh
an echo of many of the static Society
type bad ideas that you used to inhibit
progress such as
the original sin and and the idea that
everything that is already that that is
worth knowing is already known in other
words
when when your listener asked do we have
the wisdom the this kind of assumes that
wisdom is a static thing which you can
have in advance
but that is not the case the the truth
of the matter is that wisdom like
scientific knowledge is also Limitless
and what we call wisdom today is going
to be laughable silliness in centuries
to come in in that in that time if I
understand you correctly centuries or
eons to come again if all this rolls
forward it may look laughable because
our understanding our knowledge our
explanations as you say would be so much
deeper and greater and with that our
power
yes it's hard to uh it's hard to Grapple
with but you seem to be talking about
humans actually influencing big swaths
of the universe or maybe even the
Multiverse as we've influenced Earth is
that really what you're suggesting that
will we re-engineer the cosmos yes uh
that that is uh it's this is not only
desirable as Stephen Hawking says but
it's really inevitable because
um suppose that for some reason we
hadn't colonized
um Europe and had stayed in Africa until
the present day and somehow our existing
Society had had uh that is our existing
state of knowledge had formed well then
we would at that point colonize the
Northern Hemisphere because we would
want to and there would be no reason not
to because uh in this rather silly
um thought experiment we would see that
that we could easily make it our home
the the unlike any other species on
Earth
our home our our
um spaceship earth our life support
system is entirely provided by our own
knowledge
this is different from any other species
in other species it's their way of life
is determined by the knowledge embodied
in their genes in their biological
makeup and we also Evolution but we also
do depend on some fundamentals that we
don't create with our minds oxygen H2O
uh well the the in fact that's not the
case
um that we soon there'll be a lunar
colony and the oxygen and H2O that the
people there will use will be entirely
generated by human technology
and uh what the first people to arrive
there will find that they have to think
about this a lot they have to they have
to make sure that their oxygen
generators that will generate oxygen
from the Moon Rock are reliable and that
there's redundant capacity to avoid
possible errors and things going wrong
and so on but then after a while they
will know more that the whole thing will
be automated it will be uh it will
become easy for them so so easy that
they won't think of oxygen as being
something that has to be provided with
great effort in order to make this
inhospitable environment hospitable they
would just think that it's there just as
we take for granted that water will come
out of the tap maybe I misunderstood you
but when you describe this almost
infinite or infinitely expanding
knowledge and with that control I didn't
think simply of zipping around the
universe or space travel
seemed me you were describing something
even more profound than that kind of
almost the ability to reshape as we have
in many ways reshaped Earth yes the the
it's all part of the same thing I mean
we we can go and visit the moon without
reshaping it but if we want to live on
the moon then we have to have an
environment in which humans can not only
survive but thrive and in order to
thrive there have to be uh facilities in
place to create resources that people
don't have to think about
just like most of the places on that are
inhabited on the planet Earth today
were originally at the time when human
species evolved death traps
in fact as I argue in the book and this
this is slightly more complicated but
even the Great Rift Valley in East
Africa where we did evolve was also a
death trap our species came into
existence already possessing
uh technology that that people had
invented well I say people because I use
that as a generic term for all entities
that can create explanatory knowledge
and the species that were our
predecessors already had explanatory
knowledge and most of those species by
the way were killed by the environment
in which they evolved it's a terrible
mistake to think that the environment in
which we evolved are especially friendly
to us that is not the case environments
usually kill their species the
overwhelming majority of species that
have ever existed on Earth are extinct
killed by the very environments in which
they evolve of course no small number by
human beings themselves but that's a
very alternate view to the sort of cozy
Blue Green Planet spaceship Earth view
that's out there David Deutsch is with
us from from Oxford England his new book
is the beginning of infinity Professor
Deutsche David Deutsch our listeners are
responding to those you're talking about
unlimited understanding and control
um Carlos on Facebook is thinking about
somebody something else out there all
knowing all-powerful maybe he writes I
recall the Niels Bohr Albert Einstein
argument Albert Einstein saying God does
not play dice I.E we can we can know
about things he knows Bohr saying quit
telling God what to do are you
describing Humanity challenging the role
of what was traditionally thought of as
has been is as God
uh this it's funny you should mention
the boar Einstein debate because the
context in which first the the context
in which Bohr said to Einstein don't
tell God what to do was when basically
when Einstein was saying the universe
makes sense right and Bohr was promoting
a an interpretation of quantum mechanics
that tried to say that the universe
doesn't have to make sense that there
are certain questions we're not allowed
to ask that that if you think you have
understood it then you haven't that sort
of blatant irrationalism and when
Einstein used that metaphor of God
doesn't play dice that Einstein was in
fact an atheist but what he meant by
that metaphor was the universe makes
sense
to say that the universe doesn't make
sense that is a reversion to a
supernaturalist view of the world and
your your listener was saying perhaps
there's some power out there greater
than us and so on yes this is the kind
of thinking that prevented progress for
millennia
the the the if there is a
um uh the power out in the universe that
is greater than us it is because it's
just people it's people who have more
knowledge than us
We Know by people you don't mean
necessarily earthlings or human beings
but that's right I I use knowledge
makers yes broadly exactly
entities that can create explanatory
knowledge and there aren't there can't
possibly be more than one kind of those
there can only be uh ones that have made
more progress or ones that have made
less problems why why is that we've all
seen the science fiction movies some of
them look green and scaly and very and
act very bizarre what do you mean there
can only be one kind of knowledge
creating entity like ourselves the thing
is that that they like we would gain
their ability to control matter and
energy and and motion and so on by
understanding universal laws of physics
and those are the same for them and for
us
so we have the ability to understand
uh and because we are among other things
Universal computers so we can understand
any uh the the only barrier to
understanding things for us is the
amount of memory or speed of uh
computation that we have and we can
always increase those with technology
and the same will be true for the aliens
so you say don't fear them Stephen
Hawking says fear them you say don't yes
uh the the that is because
um we have to understand the lesson of
universality the lesson of universality
is that there there is only one set of
laws of physics on our planet in our
solar system in our galaxy in the whole
universe past present future it's the
same set of laws and they provide the
same set of opportunities for control
and also the same set of barriers you
know we you were speaking about
controlling the universe but the
statement is not that we can do anything
we like like gods
the statement is everything that isn't
forbidden by the laws of physics we can
do and that limitation is common to us
and to these Advanced aliens that you're
thinking of David Deutsch please turn by
let me bring our listeners in Dana in
South Wellfleet Massachusetts you're on
the air with David Deutsch in Oxford
England welcome Dana you're on the air
hi Tom um
Mr Deutsche given our record of hubris
and the resulting plunder of this planet
whether it's pollution of our
life-sustaining systems and pushing
other animals to the and plants to the
brink of Extinction
I really hope your thesis is wrong I
really don't want to see the footprint
of humankind spread beyond the earth I
would I really feel that humans need to
learn humility in the face of the cosmos
in nature before
we attempt to even quote colonize
unquote another word with imperialist
connotations
even even the moon let alone the Galaxy
then I'll put that to David Deutsch but
he's kind of suggesting that with the
Scientific Revolution it is inevitable
we keep thinking our thinking figures
things out it pushes our footprint
further and further into the universe
Dana
as long as it's possible it's
permissible Dana let us pick it up David
Deutsch what do you say to these
observations he he's these hubris sees
us as plunderers says humility first
please
yes
um the avoidance of hubris and uh the
the glorification of humility is the
thing that kept us suffering for
hundreds of thousands of years
um this is
um the the guilt of which we are Accused
by this worldview is not although it has
some Modern fashionable forms it's
actually not a new idea it is the
prevailing idea of throughout most of
History
and ironically it's uh as I said earlier
it's the really the reverse is the case
um it's not that uh we have polluted the
Earth on balance the Earth was killing
us with pollution from the moment our
species began the the cholera
um bacillus
evolved to do exactly that and killed
millions of people and before human
beings existed it killed the people that
were our predecessors the biosphere
killed all our cousin species like the
Neanderthals and so on and it has only
been since the the invention of of human
technology that we have managed to lift
ourselves a little way out of this
foreign
[Music]
let's go straight to our listeners Joe
in Farmville Virginia Joe you're on the
air with David Deutsch
Jenny is
well uh actually the bottle says the
same thing in Psalm 8 it says that the
uh
the moon and the stars are the words of
God's fingers and then it says that God
gives man dominion over the work of his
fingers and then it says what form that
Dominion will take it says God will put
all things under man's feet so that's
like saying that God will put the moon
in the stars under man's feet and you've
got a specific question about that Joe
give it to us
yes uh the idea is that uh because of
the expansion of the universe
all the galaxies are going away from us
so it seems in the further away they are
the faster they're gone it seems to me
we won't be able to colonize
but that does leave our own Galaxy with
300 billion stars so my question is how
can we get Beyond
Joe you're breaking up but I think we've
got it if the university is expanding
and expanding rapidly that means it's
moving away from us David Deutsch in
that case how do we get out there yes
um I I I only heard part of that
question but I I think I understood what
it was
um the
um uh one of the uh great growth areas
in in fundamental physics in the last
few years have been in cosmology uh we
we have learned that all the
cosmological models that anybody
believed until let's say uh 20 years ago
are definitely wrong but what we don't
yet know is the cosmological model that
is in fact right the the prevailing one
at the moment is the the universe is not
only expanding which we've known for
nearly a century but is expanding at an
accelerating rate
through this thing which we call Dark
Energy just because we need to call it
something but we have absolutely no idea
what it is so how do we how do we catch
up with it how do we get it well hold
out there if it's rushing away from us
yes well the exact
um if the the exact implications of the
accelerated expansion of the Universe on
uh the controllability of the cosmos are
not well known yet well the the the
callers
um assumption was that eventually we
would be just left with one Galaxy and
all the others would be a receding at
the speed of light so we'd never catch
up with them uh if that is so then uh
only a few
um trillion years after that the Galaxy
itself will start being torn apart by
the same forces and what we would have
to do is put more and more information
into a smaller and smaller volume
and whether that will be possible or not
depends on the exact details that we
don't yet know now all I can say is
there are plenty of cosmological models
in which
um progress can go on literally forever
that is literally no upper bound and
there are some in which progress is
forced to come into it come to an end
after a few trillion years but with
cosmological models currently changing
on a time scale of a decade or so I
think it would be rash to build our
plans for a trillion years on whatever
the current theory of that is for any
number of reasons people listening very
closely here Ellen was listening uh we
played the clip from Stephen Hawking he
talked about uh survival genes for
aggression and Humanity now holding us
back and she wants she asked if you can
address that you said that was an
artificial limitation but what does that
mean she has to do do you human beings
and re-evolve revolve into something
that we don't destroy one another for
survival purposes yes the the
um the idea of an aggression Gene
or a selfishness Gene is a
misunderstanding of what humans are it's
a misunderstanding of the universality
of humans the thing is humans can decide
that any pattern of behavior that they
think best is best and then act
according on to it well so you say but
but an awful lot of humans have felt
Hostage to violence and War for such a
long time as somebody with a spear in
his back I mean it looks like it's baked
in the cake yes uh the the
um you can't really go by most of the of
human history prior to the enlightenment
because those societies were all the
same but our Wars just got bigger our
Wars just got larger what uh if you if
you think about the kind of things that
are built into our genes like like the
design the the desire to eat food when
we're hungry or to have sex or to
preserve Our Lives if you think of of
any of those which are going to be any
of those which are going to be much more
deeply in our genes if anything is then
let's say aggression or selfishness then
you can easily see millions of examples
of those things being violated just at a
whim of culture or individual uh
decisions you know people become
anorexic and don't eat and people become
pacifists and sacrifice their lives and
uh or suicide bombers to name an evil
example so
if those things the things which are
most heavily built into our genes
can be swept away
um just by a little bit of culture
including very bad culture then there is
really no case to be made that more
subtle things like selfishness are built
in in an irretrievable way you if I may
you you pull this uh view Beyond science
itself and and you write very early on
in the book that the scientific
understanding uh improvements uh in the
way we do it the Scientific Revolution
is also in a revolution in technology
we've seen that political institutions
uh not so sure what that's called moral
values art every aspect of human welfare
yes we have listeners who are wondering
on that front Greg says that he says you
are talking about ability not morality
it says morality is the realm in which
stories Remain the relevant method of
figuring things out what do you say
uh it's
um much more controversial that there is
uh objective truth in things like
morality and art than in things like
mathematics and science but the
arguments are really the same in all
cases the fact is
um before the enlightenment there was
practically nobody in the world who
thought that say slavery was morally
wrong or that sexism was morally wrong
or that parents didn't have the right to
beat their children these were all
things that had an a virtually a hundred
percent acceptance only lunatics if
anybody
disputed it whereas now it's gone
entirely the other way around now
uh in other words now there is an
absolute consensus among thinking people
that slavery is wrong and there's other
things I mentioned are also wrong so
we've gone from 100 to zero percent and
I think that it doesn't make sense to
regard that change as arbitrary in other
words you know it could have gone either
way just like uh uh skirt length
Fashions or something you think it's the
enlightenment the Scientific Revolution
that was there as well yes it's well the
Scientific Revolution is just one facet
of what I call the Enlightenment and it
it reached into the morality as well and
these examples that I've given are cases
where morality has improved objectively
Vijay is calling from Cambridge
Massachusetts Vijay you're on the air
with David Deutsch thanks for calling
Tom hi so I
so I guided and badly reason and here is
why his basic idea is that since we can
reason we can do anything that's as long
as uh you know the we don't violate the
limits and we cannot violate the limits
placed by physics but we also know from
Computer Science and Mathematics that
there are many things that are Beyond
Reason these are called Independence
results or
incompleteness results so there are
things that we cannot know and uh the
this uh lead us to deep probably in a
philosophical issues within the context
of Computer Science and Mathematics I'm
sure Professor Dodgers most likely aware
of these things and and sent and still
he his basic thesis is that because we
can reason you know you can we can
understand anything and therefore we can
do anything and secondly
uh it's actually a true so this is one
aspect that he hasn't talked about so
far so I'm wondering why not yes we will
secondly
um the limits Place uh by physics
and The Limited place that I just
mentioned the impossibility results uh
that people have discussed in Computer
Science and Mathematics uh everything
else is possible is essentially a truism
so what exactly is he trying to say and
what is new here Vijay stand by David
Deutsch what do you say okay uh so the
the to deal with the first question
first so in mathematics there are the uh
it is it can be proved that the
overwhelming majority of mathematical
truths cannot be proved and indeed
cannot be known
and so the question is how is that
compatible with the idea that we can do
anything well uh uh the short answer is
this
if a mathematician is interested in uh a
certain problem let's say to do with
prime numbers and so on then one way
that that will lead to the bottle of
champagne being opened is if this
mathematician discovers a proof that
this the thing is true or a proof that
it's false but another way that you
could get exactly the same
success in human terms would be to prove
that it is unprovable
um so this is as much as a a reason for
writing a mathematics paper and for
opening the bottle of champagne as for
proving that it's true or proving that
it's false and if you can't prove that
it's unprovable then maybe the next best
thing is you conjecture that it's
unprovable and then you write a paper
about what would be the consequences if
it were and another paper about what it
would be the consequences if it weren't
and so and therefore you get twice the
number of papers just because the thing
you were working on is unprovable so in
the human sense mathematics provides no
barrier to progress even though as a
matter of logic there are things that we
can't know but they're not things that
matter ultimately to humans
now what is new about what I said to
answer the ER second question is simply
listen to the other commenters they are
saying that gaining control over the
universe is a impossible and B wrong and
I'm saying that the scientific worldview
which in a sense you're quite right it's
a almost a trivial consequence of just
regarding the scientific worldview is
true that the scientific worldview is
incompatible with those ancient ideas of
limitation
Vijay our time is so short at this point
let me move on but I appreciate you
raising it and the big question uh will
no doubt be worked on for a long time uh
let me get one more right here David in
Boston David thank you for calling
yeah thanks for having me on
um Mr Joyce I'm just I feel I I'm
certainly no I'm very much a fan of
Science and I I'm not opposed to the
idea of progress and knowledge I guess
for me it's a question of whether human
history the the story of human history
is simply a story of the development of
knowledge or a moral struggle it seems
to me that since bacon Francis Bacon
first formulated this idea of Technology
as control over nature the results have
always been ambiguous and people have
always felt that the way we use
technology is sometimes good and
sometimes ill and our modern
Technologies from nuclear weapons to the
capacity for a modern famine which is
very different from famines in the past
you know it's as ambiguous as it ever
has been so I'm sort of surprised
especially at this moment when this
critical environmental crisis is going
on and we're really at risk of
destroying the life-giving value of the
earth that you have so you're so
optimistic
uh David let us pick it up right there
and use the time we have David Deutsch
what do you say to our Young Smart
listener okay uh first of all uh two
things one is that you're grossly
underestimating how bad the past was how
uh how
um you mean the eugenic uh
environmentally unscathed past you mean
about that past yes
um and it was bad not only because of
what nature was doing to us but because
of what humans were doing to each other
the staticity that was imposed by bad
human ideas and violence channeled into
bad directions is simply
incomprehensible to someone who is used
to our society but the environment
certainly looked better 50 years ago
than it does today well uh I I think
that is not comparing like we'd like but
let me just say the other half of that
yes first the
um in regard to modesty this idea that
we're going to control
as much as we want to control sounds
like hubris when you if you think that
the total amount to be controlled is
finite and therefore we're going to be
nearly there and we're going to be like
Gods but actually the title of the book
is the beginning of infinity no matter
how much of this we do we will always be
just scratching the surface we will
always be looking out at an infinite
Vista that we have not yet understood
not yet conquered and so on and when we
look back we will we will think that the
previous people's ideas of being nearly
there like our present day idea that
having conquered the surface of the
Earth we're really there we're nearly
there is it will the idea that that is
hubris will seem pathetic final question
we just have one minute Enlightenment
the thing that you see behind all of
this the enlightenment might we turns
our turn our backs on that there's
certainly a lot of pushback and deny
file in substantial parts of American
politics and culture to science and
scientific the Scientific Revolution
might we turn it back on the very thing
there are no guarantees now I I believe
that the enlightenment has sort of tried
to happen several times in human history
um such as in in uh periclean Athens and
in uh Florence during the Renaissance
and I describe these in the book as well
and and there will have been other cases
as well uh which which were less
spectacular because they were put down
earlier uh it is always possible to turn
ones back on enlightenment and reason
and we could do so in which case perhaps
our whole planet is doomed and somebody
else will be the people that have the
beginning of infinity David Deutsche we
could we could go on maybe to Infinity
here it's been fantastic thank you for
joining us today from oh thank you for
having me it's wonderful to have you
with us the new book is the beginning of
infinity explanations that transform the
world I'm Tom Ashbrook thanks for
joining us this is on point
[Music]
on point is a production of WBUR Boston
and NPR
[Music]